about.md, before:

---
layout: article
titles:
  # @start locale config
  en      : &EN       About
  en-GB   : *EN
  en-US   : *EN
  en-CA   : *EN
  en-AU   : *EN
  zh-Hans : &ZH_HANS  关于
  zh      : *ZH_HANS
  zh-CN   : *ZH_HANS
  zh-SG   : *ZH_HANS
  zh-Hant : &ZH_HANT  關於
  zh-TW   : *ZH_HANT
  zh-HK   : *ZH_HANT
  ko      : &KO       소개
  ko-KR   : *KO
  fr      : &FR       À propos
  fr-BE   : *FR
  fr-CA   : *FR
  fr-CH   : *FR
  fr-FR   : *FR
  fr-LU   : *FR
  # @end locale config
comment: false
title: About
key: page-about
---

## Introduction and Bio

I am a PhD researcher at the School of Computer Science at Trinity College
Dublin, affiliated with the ADAPT Research Centre. My guide is [Prof. Owen
Conlan](https://www.scss.tcd.ie/Owen.Conlan/).

I work on the intersection of natural language processing, computational
empathy, human computer interaction, and machine learning. My current research
goals are to develop a framework to understand and evaluate empathy within
small-talk dialogue.

I want to continue to do research in the intersection of language, computation,
behaviour, and society, in the hopes of contributing to a seamlessly integrated
and ethically consistent digital society. A society where we can trust the
intelligence we create to study abstractions such as "the mind" and
"consciousness" in a way that we can not yet access.

## Current Projects

I am currenly involved in the following projects:

- Empathy in Dialogue Systems
- Context Representation in User Modeling

### Empathy in Dialogue Systems

Empathy is a complex idea in cognitive and behavioural psychology, which has
been notoriously hard to define for humans. However, if we assume that emotion
is a latent characterisitc of conversation (which is quite a big "if" to begin
with), we can then identify conversations which display a certain emotion and
attempt to replicate what happens when humans encounter said emotion in
conversation; or at least that is a summary of the state-of-the-art; ergo the
number of "empathetic chatbots" in research.

The goal of my research is to create a system wherein I can evaluate the
empathy displayed by these agents, and identify whether they, in fact,
communicate empathetically the way humans do, and if not, build a framework to
understand what components are missing. The broader goal of this study is to
identify if and how large language models tune their responses to latent
characteristics in text (because empathy is not just emotion, it is an attuned
response to identifying and contextualizing emotion).

Why? Well, first, to study the process of digitalization of the human experience
in the form of both language as a means of communication and empathy as a
sociopsychological phenomena as it represents itself in interactions, and
second, because it provides insights into one of the subcharacteristics of
a natural human conversation.

(NB: Blog post coming soon!)

### Context Representation in User Modeling

Context is a broad term, often referring to information of the circumstances in
which an event, attribute, or action can be fully understood. Within the User
Modeling, Adaptive Systems, and Personalization (UMAP) research discipline,
context can be seen as the additional information that an agent (i.e. computer)
learns about the user (including their environment, history, actions, tone,
location, etc.) that provide information relevant to performing or completing a
task.

Incorrectly represented contextual information can result in an agent
underperforming or malperforming on a given task, and learning information about
a user that is irrelevant, temporary, or just wrong. Therefore, not only is the
ability to capture context information crucial to intelligent personalized
systems, rather how that captured context is represented within the model and
changes the agent behaviour is an interesting concept to focus on and capture.

Alongside some of my colleagues at the ADAPT Centre (Jovan Jeromela, Dipto
Barman, Hassan Zaal, and Awais Akbar), with the guidance of Prof. Owen Conlan
and Prof. Judy Kay, have submitted a workshop proposal to [UMAP 2023](https://www.um.org/umap2023/),
so fingers crossed!

(NB: Blog post coming soon!)

## Past Projects

In the past, I was involved with the following projects with the wonderful
collaborators and advisors mentioned in parantheses. I am very grateful to their
contributions in my academic interests.

- **Event Analysis in Hindi and Kannada** (Jaipal Singh Goud, Pranav Goel, Suhan
Prabhu, Priyank Modi, Ujjwal Narayan, Dr. Manish Shrivastava)
- **Computational Algebraic Representation of Hindi Syntax**  (Dr. Manish
Shrivastava)
- **Non-Euclidian Spaces for Word Representation** (Siddharth Bhat, Dr. Manish
Shrivastava)
- **Sentence Similarity for Sentences with Emojis** (Prof. Isabelle Augenstein,
Nikhil Pinnaparaju)
- **Vagueness in Instructional Texts** (Dr. Michael Roth)

Commit message:

Added a blog post and some key updates to the about page

about.md, after:

---
layout: article
titles:
  # @start locale config
  en      : &EN       About
  en-GB   : *EN
  en-US   : *EN
  en-CA   : *EN
  en-AU   : *EN
  zh-Hans : &ZH_HANS  关于
  zh      : *ZH_HANS
  zh-CN   : *ZH_HANS
  zh-SG   : *ZH_HANS
  zh-Hant : &ZH_HANT  關於
  zh-TW   : *ZH_HANT
  zh-HK   : *ZH_HANT
  ko      : &KO       소개
  ko-KR   : *KO
  fr      : &FR       À propos
  fr-BE   : *FR
  fr-CA   : *FR
  fr-CH   : *FR
  fr-FR   : *FR
  fr-LU   : *FR
  # @end locale config
comment: false
title: About
key: page-about
---

## Introduction and Bio

Heya! I am Alok Debnath. Nice to meet you.

I am a PhD researcher at the School of Computer Science at Trinity College
Dublin, affiliated with the ADAPT Research Centre. My supervisors are 
[Prof. Owen Conlan](https://www.scss.tcd.ie/Owen.Conlan/) and 
[Prof. Yvette Graham](https://www.scss.tcd.ie/~ygraham/).

I work on the intersection of natural language processing, computational
empathy, human computer interaction, and machine learning. My current research
goals are to develop a framework to understand and evaluate empathy within
small-talk dialogue.

I want to continue to do research in the intersection of language, computation,
behaviour, and society, in the hopes of contributing to a seamlessly integrated
and ethically consistent digital society. A society where we can trust the
intelligence we create to study abstractions such as "the mind" and
"consciousness" in a way that we can not yet access.

You can find my [CV here](assets/pdfs/Debnath_CV.pdf) and I would love to have
a conversation with you if you are interested in anything that I am working on.

## Current Projects

I am currenly involved in the following projects:

- Evaluating Empathetic Engagement in Conversational Agents (NLP, HCI, Affective Computing, Cognitive Science)
- Context Representation in User Modeling (User Modeling, Personalization, Adaptive Computing)

### Evaluating Empathetic Engagement in Conversational Agents

Empathy is a complex idea in cognitive and behavioural psychology, which has
been notoriously hard to define for humans. However, if we assume that emotion
is a latent characterisitc of conversation (which is quite a big "if" to begin
with), we can then identify conversations which display a certain emotion and
attempt to replicate what happens when humans encounter said emotion in
conversation; or at least that is a summary of the state-of-the-art; ergo the
number of "empathetic chatbots" in research.

The goal of my research is to create a system wherein I can evaluate the
empathy displayed by these agents, and identify whether they, in fact,
communicate empathetically the way humans do, and if not, build a framework to
understand what components are missing. The broader goal of this study is to
identify if and how large language models tune their responses to latent
characteristics in text (because empathy is not just emotion, it is an attuned
response to identifying and contextualizing emotion).

Why? Well, first, to study the process of digitalization of the human experience
in the form of both language as a means of communication and empathy as a
sociopsychological phenomena as it represents itself in interactions, and
second, because it provides insights into one of the subcharacteristics of
a natural human conversation.

### Context Representation in User Modeling

Context is a broad term, often referring to information of the circumstances in
which an event, attribute, or action can be fully understood. Within the User
Modeling, Adaptive Systems, and Personalization (UMAP) research discipline,
context can be seen as the additional information that an agent (i.e. computer)
learns about the user (including their environment, history, actions, tone,
location, etc.) that provide information relevant to performing or completing a
task.

Incorrectly represented contextual information can result in an agent
underperforming or malperforming on a given task, and learning information about
a user that is irrelevant, temporary, or just wrong. Therefore, not only is the
ability to capture context information crucial to intelligent personalized
systems, rather how that captured context is represented within the model and
changes the agent behaviour is an interesting concept to focus on and capture.

Alongside some of my colleagues at the ADAPT Centre (Jovan Jeromela, Dipto
Barman, Hassan Zaal, and Awais Akbar), with the guidance of Prof. Owen Conlan
and Prof. Judy Kay, I am co-organizing this workshop!

Please check out [CRUM 2023](https://crum-workshop.github.io)! 

## Past Projects

In the past, I was involved with the following projects with the wonderful
collaborators and advisors mentioned in parantheses. I am very grateful to their
contributions in my academic interests.

- **Event Analysis in Hindi and Kannada** (Jaipal Singh Goud, Pranav Goel, Suhan
Prabhu, Priyank Modi, Ujjwal Narayan, Dr. Manish Shrivastava)
- **Computational Algebraic Representation of Hindi Syntax**  (Dr. Manish
Shrivastava)
- **Non-Euclidian Spaces for Word Representation** (Siddharth Bhat, Dr. Manish
Shrivastava)
- **Sentence Similarity for Sentences with Emojis** (Prof. Isabelle Augenstein,
Nikhil Pinnaparaju)
- **Vagueness in Instructional Texts** (Dr. Michael Roth)
